(inhales deeply)
Do you need to declare a conflict with (coughs) your
actual work or particular company in respect to this opinion?
Um, it's up to you. Um, but if you'd like, we can note that
down.
And around to you.
What do you mean, your-
Like, I agree-
... you're insured by someone?
Yeah, exactly.
You're probably all insured by them.
Yeah, that's not too bad.
Probably all been insured. I actually don't know very much.
(voice echoes and fades) As a manager-
It's who I have on paper.
I don't know what financial
What, so you've been insured by someone?
Yeah.
Just gonna say, you only share that with about a million people.
You only share that with about a million people.
No, I know, but because I'm an insurance professional, so even though I have no
financial gain from it, so... checking, to, to be
sure.
Uh, our advice is always if you share benefits with a
whole...
(coughs)
... like, if you were right to do so, then share.
But still, "If you have a financial interest."
Share it with, like, a million people. It's not working.
(coughs)
Okay.
Um,
we have John and Michael on the Zoom.
Could you please, uh, turn on your video and
unmute?
Please?
Can you hear us okay?
Yes. Yeah, we can hear you.
Okay.
If they could listen.
We're just trying to-
Oh, yeah.
We're just trying to get the video working.
Oh, here you are. We can-
You can see us now, great. Thank you,
Yeah, welcome, um, to the committee. We've got, um, 10 minutes to get premiered.
Great.
So we'll, um, head over to you. Thank you so much.
Okay. Look, thank you very much. Uh, just to introduce myself and my colleague,
Michael. So I'm John Lucas from the Insurance Council.
Um, and my colleague here, Mike Dunning from
Suncorp. Uh, we've been involved in, uh, th- the
work on the levy...... issues since, um, the
Levy Act 2017. Um, so look, I'd like to thank you
for the opportunity to speak on the Insurance Council submission.
Um,
Michael's going to provide any, uh, answers to any questions you may
have that are of a practical, technical nature, um,
from an insurer's perspective. So look, uh, we just wanna start with saying that
the new levy system for FENZ is an improvement
on the current transitional system, which was,
uh, basically using the, uh, old
1975 Fire Service Levy Act
provisions. Uh, we welcome the changes even though they've been quite costly
to, uh, implement the changes from an insurer's perspective.
A lot of sp- a lot of money spent on IT and, uh, training.
Uh, it's taken eight years to get to this workable position since the introduction
of the FENZ Act 2017. There's been a lot of, uh, backwards and
forwards getting that right, but it's finally looking good.
We all want a well-funded fire and emergency
service. Uh, there are a couple of points we've made in our submission 22nd of
September, uh, which we're just gonna briefly talk about now.
The drafting of clause 15.2 of the regulations
for mixed-use properties, that's where you've got a mixture of commercial and
residential in the same building, typically apartment buildings, does not
clearly allow the residential levy to be capped at
$107.40. That's the maximum amount that a
residential unit should be charged for a- for a levy.
So when... And- and that occurs when the drafting here where the floor area of the
building is less than 50% residential.
So it's, um, the dominant use of the building is actually commercial, but you've
got a few residential units. Um, w- we believe that
this, uh, could be a problem because those residential owners could
advertedly pay more
in the way of levy. Uh, we don't think that is the drafting intent or the
intent of the legislation. We have provided in our submission
a simple drafting fix to correct this.
So that's- that's the main point we want to make.
Um, the next point we'd like to talk about, um, and that is,
uh, this- under the, uh,
Regulatory Systems Internal Affairs Amendment Bill, that's,
uh, uh, that's basically the,
uh, um, part seven. We're gonna
move on to the, uh, schedule three
of the amendment bill, and that talks about midterm adjustments.
And we maintain that the levy rate that applied at the inception of the
policy contract has to be the same levy rate that applies to any
increases or decreases or changes to some insurer during the same policy contract
period. If we can't do that, uh, insurers would, uh, not be able to
make, um, calculations with their systems.
They would have to cancel the contract, reissue.
That would create confusion for customers, a lot of administration for- for
insurers and brokers. So we're- we're simply saying that, um,
the, um,
the- the levy rate, um,
can't
be updated during a current contract of insurance.
It has to be the same levy rate that applied at the beginning of the contract
period. So, um, we believe also
that, um, the fix that has been, uh,
proposed in the schedule three is gonna work, so that is
simply extending the, uh, transitional
levy rate posish- uh, transition, uh, to the new period, and that- that
should work for us. Um, we've also, in our submission
outlined, um, quite a unique issue where you've got
contract works policies, which are typically long period and many
years, and that's, uh, yeah, quite- quite typically where you've
got, uh, road construction, bridge construction, large civil works that
take many years. Uh, we've actually outlined a- a fix for
that in our submission as well. The last point we want to make is
that, uh, it's very important that the bill is passed by
1 April next year. Uh, insurers are at a point of almost
no return now with their IT system development and their
training. Um, so if there are
changes that are likely to come out of this, we would probably struggle
to adapt to those changes before the 1st of
July 2026, which is the- the deadline for us being able to comply with
the new provisions. So insurers can't go back now and,
um,
make any late changes to their systems.
Um, we're moving ahead with what we understand the, uh,
requirements are. Um, so yes, so
that- that- that's quite important.
Um, if we can't do that, we see that there's going to be a significant
disruption to, uh, the collection of the levy revenue in
'26 if- if there are late last-minute changes.
So, uh, look, thank you. That's, uh, all I have to add.
We're happy to take any questions. Anything you want to say, Michael?
Uh, no, beyond just- just reinforcing John's last point,
um, in clarifying that while the- the new levy is effective from 1
July, you know, renewals for- um,
for- for policy due 1 July go out from insurers
mid-March. Um, all system changes have to be- have been fully
implemented, tested. You know, we need to be 100% sure they're working
correctly. Essentially, um, uh,
we, all insurers are- are working on the assumption that the,
um, the changes as set out in this- in this bill will occur,
and essentially there is no time to make changes beyond those that
are expected, um, and get them in place by 1
July.
Thank you so much for that. Uh, we do have a question from Andy Foster.
Uh, look, thank you both. Um, the question I wanted to ask is- is about timing,
and it's how do... It- it seems like we've got ourselves in quite a tight situation
time-wise. I know what this looks like, it's been a collaborative process-
... in the design of it. How did... So first part of the question is how do we end
up in that height situation? And secondly, just, uh,
for any communication back to, uh, the minister and, and to,
uh, you know, underline the importance of getting this done on time,
what does it look like if there are...
is a problem in timing implementing this?
What, what, what does it look like for you, but what does it look like also for
most New Zealanders who are insured or most New Zealand businesses who are insured
with you? What does it do?
Yeah, look. Um, so what's happened in the past, there have been drafting
errors throughout the process. Um, we've had to go back and forth with,
with DIA on getting the, the drafting errors fixed.
So that's, that's been the delay. Um,
we maintain we needed 18 months clear, um,
clear directions, uh, to program systems and we're sort
of... We're getting there, but, uh, we haven't got all the information yet.
So, we don't see any problems for customers unless, as
we said earlier, if there, there is some last minute changes to the
legislation. We just can't... We just won't be able to turn around and make
those changes at this point in time.
We've, we've, um, as Michael said earlier, by March, April,
we're sending out the first renewals for the 2026 July
1, uh, renewal date for commercial contracts.
So, um, there shouldn't be any disruption for customers
so long as the legislation is passed by 1 April.
If it's not, we're, um, we're kind of making these
changes without the law backing us up.
That's the, that's the bottom line.
We're not-
That really was, that really was my question, is if-
Yeah.
... if, if we don't manage to deliver this in time, not suggesting there's any
chance that we won't, but, uh, if we didn't, what would ha- what would
happen?
Well, do you want me to comment on it?
Yeah, sure.
Um, uh, uh, uh, in, in simplistic terms, I think if
there was a, um, material change
in the drafting here beyond what, um, we as
insurers and, and brokers would expect, then
it's almost inevitable that we would not be able to make systems
changes to comply with that aspect
in time for policies renewing on 1 July.
So, I guess the logical implication from that is that, that as
insurers we could be in breach of the act, which clearly is something that,
that, um, organizationally we would find untenable, to be
honest. But it's the situation we find ourselves in.
We've got IAG.
Okay. That's helpful. I might ask, uh, I might ask the same question later on with
another submitter.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. We have run out of time, unfortunately, but thank you so much
for joining us this morning and we really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Great. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Bye-bye.
Thank you.
Thank you. We've now got Archives & Records Association of New Zealand.
I think, Richard, you're here to join us. Welcome to the committee.
Uh, we received your written submission.
We've got 10 minutes for your oral submission, uh, so over, over to you.
(Maori language)
Madam
Chair, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today, uh, to make an oral submission.
My name is Richard Foy. I'm the President of Archives &
Records Association of New Zealand, ARANZ te Huinga
Mahara. Uh, today I speak to you in three distinct
perspectives. Firstly, as the president, uh, of ARANZ.
Secondly, as a former chief activist, uh, head of
Archives New Zealand, our national archives from 2017 to
2020. And thirdly, as a... having served as a member on
the Operation Burnham Expert Review Group.
Uh, I think this combined experience gives me direct constitutional understanding
of the Public Records Act, uh, and its role as a
foundation of our democratic
accountability. Uh, ARANZ supports the submissions, uh,
made by the Ombudsman's Office, Dr.
Aaron Fox, and, and the Council for Civil
Liberties, uh, all of whom I understand are scheduled to make oral submissions
today. We share their concerns, um, that several
amendments, uh, in this, uh, bill would
significantly weaken the protections of the Public
Records Act, uh, and what it was designed to
uphold. Uh, our submission covers quite a lot of territory, but I just
wanna focus on three clauses, uh, that represent I think a
fundamental compromise of the public record.
So those are clauses 162, 157, and clause
20A3. The first one, the overseas exemption,
clause 162, um, that's our most urgent and
significant concern. Uh, on this speaker- um, sorry.
On this matter, I speak with particular authority during my role on the
Operation Burnham Expert Review Group.
That inquiry, uh, clearly highlighted the systemic record
keeping failures, uh, that made full accountability
impossible in a complex operational environment.
Clause 162 seeks to introduce a statutory
loophole that would allow a public office operating overseas
to request an exemption from compliance with the Public Records
Act, uh, potentially even exempting them from past
or future obligations. As a former chief archivist,
I can confirm the PRA exists to ensure the accountability of
government and we think that allowing such exemptions risk creating the
conditions for unauthorized destruction and loss of
evidence. So accountability does not stop at the
border. Uh, we don't think the Public Records Act should
either. Uh, clause 2, which is
around the sale of records, clause 157, our second key
concern is the sale of records, so specifically the
new section 20B, which states that a public record
sold ceases to have the status of a public
record. So this single change compromises
custody...... preservation, uh, and public
access, and risks institutionalizing the loss of New Zealand's
public history. We've already seen what happens in the
past when this is not done. Uh, when the functions of the Ministry of
Works and Development were privatized, uh, many of its records
were sold to Opus. Those records are now largely
inaccessible to the public, effectively lost to
researchers and to people seeking information under the Official
Information Act.
Public a- ac- public accountability cannot be
privatized. Uh, the solution that we propose is based
on operational, um, expertise, and it's reasonably simple.
Before any records are sold, uh, there must be a disposal authority
prepared by Archives New Zealand on those records about to be
sold. Uh, we think also the originals of any records identified
as having enduring value, uh, that would be transferred
to Archives New Zealand, they must be passed to Archives New Zealand first
and copies made for the sale process.
So for this reason, ARAN's, uh, really subverts that clause
20B should not proceed.
Uh, lastly, on ministerial destruction approval, so this is
new 20A3, um, ARAN
has concerns regarding the proposal that the minister's
approval is required for the destruction of a public archive under
new section 20A3. Again, as a former chief
archivist, um, I must state that this would appear to undermine the
statutory position and independence of the chief
archivist, who is currently the sole statutory authority
able to approve the destruction of
records, and thus evidence. The chief archivist's
independence is a constitutional safeguard.
It's not an administrative convenience.
Uh, it ensures that decisions about our national archives are made
impartially, free from political interference or instruction
or expediency. This principle has been affirmed by the
courts in the 1990s, so we recommend removing the
requirement for ministerial approval to protect the constitutional
independence of the chief archivist.
Madam Chair, um, the Public Records Act
is, uh, not just an administrative statute.
It's a constitutional safeguard, a mechanism that ensures
the government and ex- his executive powers remain
accountable to the people of New Zealand.
The prose, uh, proposed amendments concerning overseas
exemptions, sale of records, and ministerial approval of
destruction, um, these are changes that really diminish the
Public Record Act's, um, ability to assure
that accountability and the statutory independence of the
chief archivist. So as someone who has both administered this act and
now advocates for its protection, um, I urge the committee to adopt
our recommendations in our written submission a- and oral submission
today and remove, uh, those provisions from the
bill. (beep) Ngā mihi nui. Happy to answer any
questions.
Mm-hmm. Thank you very much. We have a ques- question from Tim.
Can I just ask you about the sale of records?
Yes. Yes, Tim. Thanks for
this one. So you don't have an issue with the sale of records.
I think the example in your submission is things like a, a library
book.
Yeah. Um, the- the actual sale is not the problem.
It's the, um-
You just want them to get stamped to show that they're no longer public?
Um, well, there needs to be, uh, disposal authority around what happens to
those records longer term. I think it's understood and accepted that
the, um... in a sale of a organization, those
become an asset that may be needed for the conduct of business.
But those records may also have enduring value, evidential value, as
well as historic value longer term.
But, but, but are you preserving the- that historical?
Yeah, I understand that point.
Yeah.
Are you preserving that by stamping them or marking them to show that
they have been sold properly and are no longer public
record?
Yeah. We would expect that there would need to be a s- a strong declaration on
those documents that that was what has happened.
So, so I j- I just wanna understand this 'cause this is more your
expertise than mine.
(laughs)
Um, so you want... So let's take the library book.
It gets marked as that it's no longer a public record, but you still want it
to be preserved, am I-
Oh, the library book is probably just an example, um, because a library book is
not a public record.
P- p- pick a better one for me.
(laughs) Yeah, yeah. It's not a rec-... Um,
s- so it needs to be very clearly marked that it's no longer, um, a
public record-
Yes.
... uh, that it's for use, uh, by the organization that it's been
sold to. Uh, but there, there ought to have been some work
beforehand to understand whether it should actually be transferred
across to archives, um, or made accessible by the
public.
Yeah.
So it's-
So it's more about that process before it than the-
Yeah.
Mark?
Just, just a very quick sup, thanks, Chair.
It was just at that point, who actually makes that assessment in terms
of authorizing the things?
That, that, um, we believe needs to be with Archives New Zealand and the chief
archivist.
Yeah.
Thank you. No further questions. Oh, no. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Celia.
Thank you.
Very enthusiastic.
Um, I... It's interesting in the relationship between the state archives and
council archives and so on, it's probably beyond us
here. But I just wondered if you had any examples
in the past, um, where, um,
information that could reveal wrongdoing or,
um,
inappropriate decision-making, um, maybe not listening to
recommendations about safety or construction, something like that, had
been lost. Got any specific examples?
Uh-
Or e- and if not now, maybe you can come back to this.
Yeah, certainly can. Um, uh, I think the Operation
Burnham, um, and the expert review group, uh,
showed v- uh, very strong case around-...
uh, not necessarily destruction of records, but the, um,
poor management of them and therefore the lack of access to
evidence. Uh, there, there are many cases through history
of, um, uh, improper
management, uh, lack of access.
Occasionally, um, destruction (Throat clearing) ...
which is why the Public Records Act exists and that any destruction of
records has to be, uh, through a disposal authority
that's, um, approved by the chief archivist.
Thank you.
Thank you. We have now run out of time, so I'll just check with Andy that his isn't
a very quick question.
Uh, no, look, I can live without it.
Okay.
Thank you so much for your time. Thank
you. Thank you. It wouldn't have been a quick one.
(laughs)
(laughs) Thank you. That shows amazing restraint.
So we've got, um, IAG New Zealand now.
Welcome, Andrew.
Tēnā koutou katoa. So I'm Andrew Saunders from IAG New Zealand.
We're, uh, New Zealand's largest insurer and here to
submit on, on the bill. And welcome the opportunity
to do so and our focus is solely on the fire and emergency levy-related
aspects, which is Part 7, Schedule 3.
Um, I'll make, I'll provide a bit, provide some comments and leave some time for
questions-
Yes, we've got, yeah, 10 minutes.
... but there's some to come. So yeah, so these changes are very technical and very
discrete, but they're also very important and they come on the back of a long
journey, which my colleagues from the Insurance Council have alluded to, back to
2017. And there's been a lot of work done since and it's been quite
engaging, quite collaborative, but issues have been found along the way.
And as it was alluded to in that submission, there was, in-
insurance industry needed 18 months from when everything was locked down in terms
of legislation and regulations, and that through to the 1 July 2026 start
date, and that meant the end of 2024.
And the legislation was finalized and the regulations were made by the end of
2024. However, in early 2025, as we really got into the
nitty-gritty, some of these issues percolated up and striking issues
that you now see in the bill. And there are also some other changes around how
something like midterm adjustments was viewed by FENZ.
So various things happened during, as the implementation really got underway, and
that's led to this bill, which is why we're now making these late changes now
only six months from implementation rather than the 18.
So that's sort of a bit of broader context and happy to come back to that.
Obviously, the, the FENZ levy is, is just a primary funding source for
FENZ. Insurers collect about $800 million a year from our customers, commercial
and consumer customers every year.
And the reality is we have to get all that right, 'cause if we get it wrong, if we
don't collect enough, we have to make that up to FENZ and we sub- could be subject
to penalties. If we collect too much from our customers, we have to remediate, we
have to pay our customers back, and then we have to, we're also subject potentially
to penalties under the FMA regime.
So whichever way we get it, so the reality with all these levies is you've just got
to get it right, and the law obviously needs...
That's on us to get our systems right, but equally the law has to be right
and obviously very clear and crisp to support that.
So yes, on the bill, we just have three really key points.
Probably one I've already already said, which is that these changes are very
discrete, but they're very important and they have to be made.
And as, as I think it was alluded to earlier, as, as a kind of, if you view this as
a big project, whether we go from a change...
And these changes are significant, 'cause it's not just the levy rates.
There's changes in the way the levy's calculated, there's new exemptions, there's
all new types of levy rates. So it's a big, much bigger change than we've ever had
before. So in terms of that as a project with us and what
our other insurers are doing, we need to have everything identified and work it
through, how to price all our different products, line up all the technical
changes, line up the people, et cetera, et cetera.
And we're already well down that track to play it through.
And all that's being done in anticipation of some of these changes being made.
'Cause we know they need to be made, they're the right changes, government realizes
that. So it's kind of all in the chute on the basis that this happens.
Um, we can come back to that, that sort of question.
Um, we've noted it, as the Insurance Council did, and we're obviously members of
the Insurance Council, a couple of key points, one around Clause 92 and mixed-use
buildings, which we think is just a, a small thing that was missed and can be put
back in to fix the, achieve what's the intent.
And then Schedule 3 around the co- multi-year contract works, which I think has
been probably touched on really. Um, those contracts can be very long and
again, because there's a lot of change going on...
And just another piece of context, when people make changes to contracts mid-term,
insurers will change the premium to reflect that up or down.
But that will all be done on the basis of the rates that applied at the start.
We won't suddenly start applying the new premium rate that comes in.
So this is about consistency between that approach where the rate will be adjusted,
but as per the scheme as originally conceived.
This is why you get a big problem if you have a disconnect where suddenly we're
applying the premium rate as the contract was originally incepted and
suddenly if you had to apply a FENZ rate that came along halfway through the
contract, that creates a lot of extra complexity. So that's a bit of context there.
And then, yeah, just in terms of the timing, which we can probably maybe come back
to again, the 1 April date was really around the fact that whilst the,
the levy officially commences on 1 July 2026, the reality is we will be sending
out paperwork to lots of customers, particularly the intermediated commercial
and other, uh, customers from possibly even March, but
potentially A- April. And some of those will effectively be asking people to pay
levy, which relies on the changes in this bill.
So if those bills aren't made and you have an, uh, you basically have an invoice
going out, which doesn't really have a clear foundation.
Not for all, it's only for certain classes, but there are some
classes. So that's the general gist.
Important future refinements to be made.
We're always progressing in anticipation of what's happening.
So it needs to happen and by 1 April 2026.
And yeah, happy to take any, any questions.
Thank you. Andy?
Yeah, look, I'm gonna follow up. Yeah, I think you heard the question I asked-
Yes. ... uh, earlier. Um, same question, but you've used some very clear language
here, um, that failure to meet the milestone, it's the,
the, the, the 1 April, um, will result in, in regulatory and operational
crisis. Pretty strong language. What does that mean? So I, I, and I...
The reason I'm asking that is actually to help you- Yes.
so that we can make the case that actually we need to make sure this thing gets
done in time. So we did use, we deliberately used strong language, um- Yeah. ...
and brought, and brought attention, which is, yeah, is, is useful.It would be a
very complex situation. It depends on what the issue is. Mm-hmm.
But at the end of the day, I say our project, like we've already literally, some of
our systems are already signed off, like they're already locked and loaded for 1
July 2026. So, it's not even a matter of us not having finished them, they're
actually already done. Not all of them, but some are already done.
So we're already very much in the model.
It would be a crisis in the sense that you'd have a situation where there could be,
as (whistles) I think I alluded to before, we could be sending out an effectively
offends levy, saying to a customer, "This is the fends levy you are due to
pay." And they could say, "Well, the law doesn't actually say
that." Right. "Law doesn't say we're required." So you have a complete disconnect
which would just put us into a hugely awkward position.
And because of the timelines, the way insurance works, when we send out renewals
well in advance, we can't just sort of chop and ch- we can't just sort of chop and
change up into June and go, "We've already sent it out in April." So it's,
it's really, that's the kind of, it's just a f- it's like a project that just has a
flow to it. And if you start, you just can't, if you start making changes at
the end, we're in a situa- and we can't, even at that point for us, if the
government's, "Oh, this is all very complex and difficult, let's just delay it,
let's just kick it out a year." Even that creates a whole nightmare 'cause all of a
sudden we've coded all our systems- Yeah, yeah.
for 1 July 20- we'd have already sent it out in order to start withdrawing stuff.
So, so, so- It would just be a complete- Yeah. That's, that's sort of the crisis.
So i- if your customers say, i- if that happened- Yeah.
and your customers said, "Oh, law doesn't say that-" Yeah. "...
you can't do that." Does that mean the whole system sort
of... Well, the question then would be, I mean, I think- Runs, runs properly- We've
already written, I think OCNZ has already written to the Minister just illuminating
that. Yeah. This is all, it's all workable as long as the Bill progresses and gets
passed quickly. Mm-hmm. And we know that's unusual for an omnibus bill.
They're not usually the ones that get fired through Parliament with great haste.
But in this case, that will just need to be done 'cause the way it's worked
out. Otherwise, I don't know what we'd do.
We'd just be in a very awkward situ- situation where you'd, you'd expect the guy
who need the minister to be out there saying, "Oh, you know, yeah, okay, the
legislation has been passed, but it is going to be passed." (paper rustles) And you
know, you're trying to provide confidence.
So I mean, that, you know, those sort of things can potentially be managed but it
just gets very awkward. So all of that just gets very awkward and the way to
avoid all of that is for the Bill, you know, to come back, for the Select Committee
to come back in Feb, and the min- government to pass it, and then it's all fine,
and the flow works, the invoices, you know, offends levy, everything goes out,
everything just works smoothly. (laughs)
Otherwise, it just gets into- I'll,
I'll- ... a very awkward and complex situation- I wouldn't- ... that we have.
We're try, but reality is, we could think about those sort of permutations, but
we just don't really want to 'cause it almost gets very- (laughs) It's too scary.
There's just no easy way. Yeah. Once you get into that space, it just gets very
messy. So, uh, but that can be avoided and that's obviously what we're hoping for.
Yeah.
Come on up. Just really quickly, um, just to sup on that, you've highlighted the
steps, everything needs to be in order, but this is the absolute focus
to get the Bill through.
That's basically what you're telling us.
From a regulatory point of view, 'cause all the other regulatory stuff is all
tidied away. Our project people are all full steam ahead on doing this and
have been for, well, a long time- Yeah, it has. ...
since early, well, end of 2024. So they're all full steam ahead
and we're trying to keep them focused and not worrying about, "Okay, is the Bill
going to pass? Is the Bill going to pass?" (laughs) So it's all about focusing them
on delivering what we in the Government intend it to be delivered,
and then that all works fine. And not, and obviously our focus on the regulatory
side of the business is to, you know, emphasize to the government and the committee
that the changes need to be made and then it will, as I say, the process
will just phase through and it's-
Okay. ... it's all straightforward. (laughs)
Thank
you. That's all we're hoping for.
Thank you so much Andrew, message received.
And thank you so much for, um, joining us today and for your written submissions as
well. No problem. Thank you for your time. Yeah.
Appreciate it. Thank you so much. Thank you.
We now have our Chief Ombudsman, John Allen and team
here.
Come on. (whispers) Thank you. Welcome back to the committee.
We've received your written submission.
We've got 10 minutes, uh, for oral submission, um, and/or
questions. So over, over to you.
Kia ora tatou. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the submission.
I've got Gareth Darby with me. Uh, Gareth's one of our most senior, uh,
investigators and analysts, uh, and was closely, uh, was
closely involved in the Operation Burnham, uh, inquiry
and in the, uh, work that flowed from that.
So this is a very specific, uh, submission that relates to Clause
162 of the Bill. Uh, and as you'll be
aware, uh, specifically it relates to the proposed
amendment to the Public Records Act, uh, to allow
agencies that have relationships with offshore
organizations to get exemptions from
compliance with the Public Records Act,
uh, from the Chief Archivist. And if the Chief
Archivist then says-
(coughs) ... yes or no, then potentially to, uh,
appeal-
Hmm.
... the Chief Archivist's decision, uh, to, uh, the
Minister-
(coughs)
... for the final decision. And the context of this
particular proposal comes out of the government
inquiry, uh, into Operation Burnham, which I'm sure
members are aware, uh, related to the activities of the
NZDF, uh, in Afghanistan. Uh, and
in that particular inquiry, criticism was directed to
NZDF's, uh, record keeping processes and
the adequacy of them, which in that case,
uh, meant that some records were held by other
international parties, uh, and in fact made it more
difficult, uh, for NZDF to prove, uh, that
our military had in fact complied, uh, with
international law, uh, because the access to those
records, or indeed the knowledge of those records, uh,
was not, uh, easily, uh, uh, retained or
understood, uh, by NZDF.
so the recommendation of that inquiry, uh, which
found that NZDF fell short of its
obligations, uh, in relation to the management of
information, uh, was that they introduce
processes that are in accordance with international best practice,
uh, and sufficient to remove the failings
identified by the inquiry.And those,
um, requirements were to support two key constitutional
principles, uh, civilian control of the
military, uh, and ministerial
responsibility. And as you can see, this
response is quite a distance, uh, from
what, uh, the, uh, inquiry, uh,
practically, uh, suggested. Uh, and the
recommendation that we are making to this committee, uh,
is that to put... to align the
bill more accurately with the concern and mischief that
the government inquiry identified, uh, you,
we need to look at some,
uh, direction or some assistance to the
chief archivist, uh, and to the minister potentially, uh, in
terms of the way in which they exercise, uh, their
discretion. And you'll see that there are two specific, uh,
recommendations, uh, that we have made,
uh... (papers rustle) Um, so thank you.
Uh, two specific recommendations which we have made, uh,
one of which is that the, um,
the, the... as a consequence of the decision, we maintain
awareness of which records are being controlled, uh,
and managed by a specific country or partner
organization, uh, and that we reta- retain the
ability to retrieve these records from that country or
organization where required by law and
practice. So that's the specific recommendation that we are
making. We think that that will more appropriately align with
the mischief identified, uh, by the government
inquiry. Uh, and at the moment, we believe that
the proposed amendment, uh, is
not aligned with what was recommended, uh, and would
not enable, uh, the particular concerns to be
addressed. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks for that. Um, Gareth, did you have any?
No, go ahead.
All right, Celia.
Thank you. Thank you for coming in. I've got a couple of questions.
Um, the first was that pre... and I don't know if you've had the opportunity to
read the other, other submissions.
No, I haven't.
But it would be... Um, it may be useful.
Um, the first one was from the Archives and Records
Association, and expressed some concern about potential
effect. Is that... I hope I'm not misrepresenting, um, Richard.
Um, some concern about the ability to have a ministerial
override in the decision-making.
Um, that seems to be a new, um, thing for the
Public Records Act, and I wonder if you had a comment on that.
And then I've got an- another question that arose from reading the Civil
Liberties submission.
Well, um, uh, obviously, we are concerned
about the way in which these discretions are actually
applied and exercised. Uh, and there are
other... and there are other provisions where the minister does
have, uh, the opportunity to make final decisions, for
example, in some of the immigration jurisdictions that we, that we
manage. Uh, so it's not an... it's not a completely
uncommon, uh, provision. Uh, but generally, it is
useful to provide both ministers and certainly the chief
archivist, uh, with some guidance as to how
that discretion should be exercised.
At the moment, it is completely unwritten, uh, therefore it is
extraordinarily broad. Uh, and we are concerned that
as a consequence of that, uh, decisions will be
made, uh, that are not in the long run best interests of
this country.
And to some extent, if I may, um,
do you think there is sufficient in this bill
to require that recording of the reasons
for those decisions?
Uh, well, there's nothing specific in this bill that I'm aware of
that, uh, does that at all, but there is, of
course, uh, the general requirements of public
law, uh, in our country, uh, which does,
uh, require organizations making decisions to
record the basis of those decisions.
And the Ombudsman regularly, uh, interrogates,
uh, that record, uh, to determine whether or
not decisions made by agencies are reasonable or
unreasonable. So, uh, there, there
is a foundation in common law for that.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, but given we're going to be talking about international
parties here, uh, some, uh, some,
uh, support for that notion would not be inappropriate
in my view.
Thank you. And sorry, could I ask my
one about civil liberties real quick? Sure, yeah. I've got Andy as well and Tim.
Sorry. Um, uh, the, um, Civil
Liberties, the Council of Civ- Civil
Liberties, um, makes a point that the Inspector
General of Defense, um, has not
published any reports, um, for well over a year
and is, um... The
council seems to be critical about that role.
I- and I just wondered if you had any comment, if, if you haven't read this
submission, but if you had any comments on, on that general
area.
Uh, no, I don't. I haven't read the submission.
Uh, and, uh, I haven't, uh, engaged yet.
In fact, I'm not sure that, uh,
the... yeah, so, so no, I, I don't
think I should comment at the moment.
Andy.
Uh, we have met with the, with the deputy, uh-
Miss Timsol.
... and then I, I believe it might even be today that the director-general is being
appointed, so-
Right, right.
... uh, there's a process of trying to engage with them in, in due course.
Thank you.
Thank you. That, that, that, that was my concern.
I wasn't sure whether the director-general had been appointed and I wasn't even
sure that the-
Inspector-general.
Inspector-general, I mean, and, and I hadn't...
I wasn't sure whether he had been named at this stage, so-
That's why I was-
... Eddie Foster.
Yeah, look, um, thank you. Uh, you've talked in your submission about,
um, decision-making principles to guide the chief archivist and minister-
Yeah.
... in terms of the- the- the information where there is a- a- an
international component.
Yeah.
Uh, but looking at the- the, um, Public Records Act at the moment, are you c- are
you, um, satisfied that there are principles in there?
I mean, there's a lot of decisions that the chief archivist gets to make.
Are you satisfied that there are principles that guide those decisions, um,
somewhere in that bill? 'Cause I can't see them.
Well, what I can say is that in our dealings with
the chief archivist, and we do have significant dealings-
Yeah.
... uh, with, uh, the-
(coughs)
... chief archivist, uh, we have found a very
constructive engagement, and we have been able together to work
through, uh, foundations of, uh, sensible
decision-making under the current legislation.
Uh, I haven't read the bill, uh, with the level of detail that
you're referring
Well, that would be in the act then, the existing act.
Oh, sorry. I haven't read the act-
Okay. ... with the level of detail you're referring to, but Gareth will have-
Yeah.
... so I'm sure he can answer for it.
I mean, Section 17 of the Public Records Act has a very strong presumption that all
public records must be kept and maintained in an accessible manner.
Uh, so that's the default presumption, and it's, while it's only the one clause,
essentially, um, that's the overriding principle.
So this would be a departure from that, essentially.
And so, where it's a departure, you'd expect it to be fleshed out and to be
narrow and prescribed by law as to why you could depart from that prescribed
presumption.
Right. Okay, so you're- you're satisfied that Section 17, um, is enough, because
I mean, relying on a good r- good working relationship and everybody doing their
job properly, wonderful, but if there's no basis in the- in the- not enough basis
in the law. But what you're satisfied is that 17 actually is a sufficient basis,
generally, and then this just leaves a departure here, which we want- you want to
deal with?
The chief archivist has issued guidelines around what that looks like in practice,
so public offices will have instructions on what that means-
Yeah.
... and when they can dispose of, say, transitory records and that kind of thing.
And the chief ca- chief archivist has sufficient l- uh,
statutory, um-
They've got-
... backing to do that?
Yes, they issue general disposal authority to say, "This is the circumstances in
which you may dispose of records."
Yeah.
Um, so that covers the gamut of pretty much everything c- created by the public
sector. And then where necessary, they may issue specific directions
around, um, maintenance of particular records, particularly with
emerging technology and that kind of thing.
Okay. It was- it was a statutory basis, so you're happy with that?
Thank you.
We are at time now, but um, just a-
... quick, uh, final question
(coughs)
Just really quickly, Mr. Chief Ombudsman, twice you mentioned
mischief, referring to, um, OpBurnham.
That's a word that never re- appears once in the report into
that.
It's a legal word.
So I understand
that there were some, uh, issues around
recordkeeping. But there just may be, given this is a public
thing, uh, a- a perception out there that there was some kind of finding which
wasn't found. I just wonder if you could explain what you're referring to there and
what your concern is
Oh, the mischief.
So- so mischief is simply a- s- a- it's language commonly used in- in
legal- legal contexts.
Yeah, but it's not for people watching, so I just-
No, no, I understand.
... thought I'd give you the chance.
So- so, sorry. I mean, all I- all I was intending was that that is
the, uh, that was the specific issue, um, the- the- the
focus, uh, the specific issue that the, um,
inquiry dealt with in relation to the
question of access to information.
So that's what I was referring to. And the mischief is simply
a- a legal ph- a- a legal phrase that is used to characterize the sort of
central concept, uh, that was being, uh-
With respect to recordkeeping.
... (laughs)
With- with respect to recordkeeping, because that, of course, is the focus of this
submission.
Thanks.
Thank you so much. Thank you both for your, uh, time this morning.
Thanks for staying with us for-
Thank you.
... four minutes. Uh, we do have a final submitter this morning on Zoom.
Could you stand as there, uh, Dally Sander?
Thank you so much for joining us today.
Um, we've received your written submission, and, uh, we have, uh, time, 10
minutes here to- to hear from you orally.
So if you would like to, um, uh, start your submission, we'll hand over to
you.
Thank you. Uh, my submission is
targeted solely at the amendments to the heart,
uh, act. Uh, I've said in my, uh, written
submission that Section 47 (2)
is, uh, welcomed, which
places- it gives- puts the onus
on providers to obtain and accept information, uh, from
donors. Um, but it also says
that the- the clinics who are the providers should
accept information from donors' personal
representatives. But donors' personal
representatives is not defined anywhere in the
legislation.
Interesting.
Um, so
I think that any legislation that comes out needs to flesh out exactly what that
means. I mean, it- it may be patently obvious that it's just
anybody, but if it's- if it's anybody, then that's
fine. But if y- if- if there's a- an
intention to limit it to within a scope of people, then we need to actually
say who these people are.
Uh, and then in- in terms of the proposed amendment
to Section 52, as I say in my written submission,
it's a good start, but it doesn't solve the whole problem.
But
my guess is that this amendment is aimed at
preventing people from being multiple
donors. You know, there has been cases where people have
tried to come into New Zealand who want to donate their
sperm. They've got YouTube channels promoting themself
as, you know, serial donors. And we want
to prevent that and limit, to some extent, the amount of
families that people can create from donor sperm
particularly and- and then from donor
eggs.... but we, we have no legislation
that puts any limit on the number of people that you can
donate to, so that is an issue within our, uh,
legislation. Uh, the, the clinics operate
themself with a, a limit that they apply, and that
varies depending on clinics. Uh, Australia
has... Some states have got legislation that put limits on,
uh, and others don't. But, uh, what I'm, I'm
saying here is, is
what we were proposing here is a clinic can call
up, uh, the Heart Registrar and say, "How many
children has this person helped create?" And
the, the registrar will now be authorized to advise
them. Um, but
if, if the, if the person is, is donating
at multiple clinics at the same time, there's no mechanism
for the clinics to share information between themselves,
and the clinics don't share this information,
uh, between themselves for one reason or another.
So, my suggestion would be that we have to
amend the legislation to put a mechanism
in place
that requires the clinics to share their information, uh,
about donors, uh, before the gametes are used to help
create another, uh, family so that we ensure that we're
not over-donating. Because if we, uh, you know,
the, the amendment itself is, is useful, but it, as I say, it doesn't
solve the whole problem.
And, um, you know, while, while we're amending the Heart Act, there
is like a glaring issue in the Heart Act, which is with the
Voluntary Register. The Voluntary Register only
relates to, uh, voluntary
donations that took place before the 21st of August
2005. You know, 20-odd years later,
there are people who are donating in the community, not through
a, a fertility clinic, whose information has not been gathered,
meaning there's 20 years of information,
access to information about donors that
donor-conceived children cannot access.
And th- that's not to say that these people don't want to go on
the register. They're just prevented from doing it, and the
registrar is prevented from receiving the information.
Uh, so what we really need to, to look at that, um,
if, if, if we're amending the Heart legislation.
Those are my s- oral submissions. I don't know if anybody has any
questions.
Just had a question around, um, you suggested putting in some definitions, but I
think, uh, I was just trying to find it in your written submission.
Did you, did you think each of those words should be defined or that, uh, it should
be defined as a, as a term?
As, as a term, so donor's personal
representative.
Donor's-
That, that's the word, that's the words that are used in,
uh, Clause 122.
Okay.
Cool.
Yes, sir. Any-
So, look, thanks, Stuart. The, um, so
Section 52 as it is at the moment says that the providers have got to keep a track
of donor offspring births.
Mm.
Um, and then it says it's gotta be a, an effective system for being notified.
But I,
what I take as your argument is that because you've got different providers, if
there's no, um, uh, collaboration between those providers,
it's not actually an effective system.
Is that essentially your-
Correct, yeah. And, you know, it's not that it, that it hasn't been raised with the
providers. They're, they're all aware of it.
Uh, but the, um,
I don't know for the... I, I guess as I say in my, my
written submission, there, there'll be a multiple of reasons why they don't do
it.
Mm.
Um, and, but, uh, uh, the,
system
is, is not working as, as intended.
Yeah. Is, are there, are there any privacy issues here
that need to be managed?
Well, I mean, the, I, I guess with, with any donation that takes
place within clinics, people have to sign consents.
And, uh, one of the consents could be that they are consenting to
the, um, the clinic checking with another clinic to see
whether you've, uh, donated there or not.
And then if the person's not wanting to consent to that, then the
clinic may
opt not to
have, have them as a, as a donor.
Yeah, okay. Thank you.
Thank you so much. I'm just checking to see...
I don't think we have any further questions, but thank you very much for your very,
um, interesting submission. For your written submission, we've noted your, um,
recommendations. Thank you so much for this.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you.
Happy Christmas, committee.
And to you.
(laughs)
(laughs) Thank you so much. We'll now move out of our public
session.
(whispering)